Posting an error guidelines doc! (#15)
AlexsLemonade/2020-july-training: workshop/posting-error-example.md

<img src = "screenshots/chunking_code.png" width = "500">

- Go back to the beginning of your notebook and re-run your code in order and make sure you haven't missed any vital steps! Order matters!

## Step 2) Draft out your question you'll post.

You may want to open up a text editor to write this out before posting (this is a personal preference thing).

For our example error, here's how each of the "four points" (and the optional one) could be included in your posted question; we will go through the details on each point:

<img src = "screenshots/breakdown.png">

### Where is this error occurring; what notebook/chunk?

- In our workshop, notebook references tend to make sense to provide, however, more generally this should be any context around __where__ you've encountered this error.

- If you are *not* working from any CCDL materials, it is *even more important* to provide context around what the notebook you are creating is supposed to be doing.

- Note that line numbers change as you've added code, so line numbers as a reference aren't as helpful.

*For our example:*  
<img src = "screenshots/where-is-the-error.png" width = "600">

### What is the goal of this code?  

> - Providing context around your end goals for this code will help others tailor their advice toward your goal as well as helping the understand what you are working toward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Providing context around your end goals for this code will help others tailor their advice toward your goal as well as help them understand what you are working toward.
```

Is this what you meant here? Seems a little redundant to me (feel free to disagree!)... unless you really meant
```
- Providing context around your end goals for this code will help others tailor their advice toward your goal as well as help you understand what you are working toward.
```

Author: It is a redundant sentence! I'll trim it down! Thx

    *Examples of informatoni you may want to include (whenever it is applicable):*
    - What is your scientific question?
    - What does your input data look like?
       - What kind of file *e.g.* `.TSV`, `.fastq`?
       - What information is included the data?
       - What are the columns?
       - What are the rows?
    - What'd your desired output?
       - What kind of results are you looking for e.g. a plot, a table, processed/filtered data?
       - What kind of file *e.g.* `.TSV`, `.fastq`?

- Sometimes you can bypass an error completely by using an alternative strategy altogether, but your helper won't be able to suggest an alternative if they don't know your ultimate goal.

*For our example:*  
<img src = "screenshots/what-is-the-goal.png" width = "600">

### What is the code that is producing this error?

> - You should [use backticks to format your code.](../virtual-setup/slack-procedures.md#adding-code-blocks-to-messages).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You should [use backticks (```) to format your code.](../virtual-setup/slack-procedures.md#adding-code-blocks-to-messages).
```

Since we can't assume that readers will click the link.

Formatting your code makes it easier for others to distinguish between your code and the words in your post where you are otherwise describing the problem.

- Screenshots are not ideal because others can't copy-paste your code from a screenshot. Being able to copy-paste the code with backticks makes it easiest for others to help you.

*For our example:*  
<img src = "screenshots/what-is-the-code.png" width = "600">

### What is the error or problematic outcome?  

> - Include the any error messages verbatim. Also preferably not a screenshot so others can copy-paste for Google searching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Include any error messages verbatim. Also preferably not a screenshot so others can copy-paste for Google searching.
```

- If you don't have an error message per se, but do have something else that is not working as expected, describe what isn't working and how you found it.
     - *Example*: "This data.frame I'm showing in my code, called `cool_df` doesn't have row names when I look at it in my environment panel".
- Context around when the error appears versus when it does not can be helpful clues to your reader.

*For our example:*  

> <img src = "screenshots/what-is-the-code.png" width = "600">

Reviewer: Looks like this is the same screenshot from the previous section, I would expect the error message in the screenshot here.

Author: Good catch!

- If you have tried solutions you have found posted online, including the links to those solutions is helpful.

*For our example:*  
<img src = "screenshots/what-have-you-tried.png" width = "600">

## Step 3) Post to Slack!

Navigate to your particular workshop's training channel.

If you wrote out our example question post in a text editor, it may have looked like this; where backticks will become code chunks after we copy-paste it in Slack:

<img src = "screenshots/text-editor.png" width = "500">

When you are typing out your question you may find it helpful to have our "four points" as your headers but that is up to you.
We've also included [a checklist you could use for creating your post](#posting-a-code-question-checklist).

When we copy and paste our text in Slack, it may ask  you if you'd like to `Apply formatting`. Click `Apply`:

<img src = "screenshots/slack-apply-formatting.png" width = "500">

This will change your post to be formatted:

<img src = "screenshots/slack-formatting-applied.png" width = "500">

If all looks set, click the green arrow to post it!

> **Slack Tip:** if you see a mistake in your post you missed, you can click on the three dots in the corner of your Slack post and choose `Edit message` and fix the error.

Reviewer: Perhaps we can add a screenshot here as well like the one below to highlight the three dots for more context here, what do you think?

Author: Good idea! screenshot added!

But, asking questions about code in such a way that others can readily help you can be tricky and is a skill itself!

Here we've laid out guidelines for posting your question so that your peers and the CCDL team will readily be able to help you find a solution.
Following these guidelines will take more time but it will increase your chances of getting speedier responses that more adequately help you resolve your error!

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**  *generated with [DocToc](https://github.com/thlorenz/doctoc)*

- [What information should a question about code include?](#what-information-should-a-question-about-code-include)
- [A troubleshooting example](#a-troubleshooting-example)
  - [Step 1) Do what you can to try to solve the error yourself (but don't tire yourself out!)](#step-1-do-what-you-can-to-try-to-solve-the-error-yourself-but-dont-tire-yourself-out)
  - [Step 2) Draft out your question you'll post.](#step-2-draft-out-your-question-youll-post)

>     - [Where is this error occurring; what notebook/chunk?](#where-is-this-error-occurring-what-notebookchunk)
>     - [What is the goal of this code?](#what-is-the-goal-of-this-code)
>     - [What is the code that is producing this error?](#what-is-the-code-that-is-producing-this-error)
>     - [What is the error or problematic outcome?](#what-is-the-error-or-problematic-outcome)
>     - [(Optional) What have you tried thus far?](#optional-what-have-you-tried-thus-far)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - [Where is this error occurring; what notebook/chunk?](#where-is-this-error-occurring-what-notebookchunk)
      - [What is the goal of this code?](#what-is-the-goal-of-this-code)
      - [What is the code that is producing this error?](#what-is-the-code-that-is-producing-this-error)
      - [What is the error or problematic outcome?](#what-is-the-error-or-problematic-outcome)
      - [(Optional) What have you tried thus far?](#optional-what-have-you-tried-thus-far)
```
I think that's required for this to render with the indentation properly (at least in the markdown)

Author: I just trusted doctoc (perhaps foolishly).

  - [Step 3) Post to Slack!](#step-3-post-to-slack)
  - [Step 4) Look for responses (in the same thread)!](#step-4-look-for-responses-in-the-same-thread)
  - [Posting a code question checklist](#posting-a-code-question-checklist)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# What information should a question about code include?

We consider the themes of a good troubleshooting post to be `context` and `specificity`.
The more context you can provide, and the more specific you can be about your problem, the easier it will be for someone to help you.

**Overall your posted code question should include:**

- Where is this error occurring (notebook/chunk)?
- What is the goal of this code?
- What is the code that is producing this error?
- What is the error or problematic outcome?

*Optionally:*
- What things have you tried thus far?

> To demonstrate what we mean by these guidelines we will walk through an example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To demonstrate what we mean by these guidelines we will walk through an example.
```

# A troubleshooting example

> In this example, I'm using our exercise notebook, `04a-intro_to_R_exercise.Rmd`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, I'm using our exercise notebook `04a-intro_to_R_exercise.Rmd`.
```

Below I'm showing a screenshot of what this error would look like when encountering it in [our RStudio Server](../virtual-setup/rstudio-login.md)

> <img src = "screenshots/file.path-error.png" width = "800">

Reviewer 3: I might zoom in on the notebook here... too much context?

## Step 1) Do what you can to try to solve the error yourself (but don't tire yourself out!)

The best way to learn how to solve errors in code is to figure them out yourself.
So try to explore the error a bit - but we are also here to help you so don't hesitate to ask for help! (_If you are feeling exasperated by your error, skip to Step 2_).

> We recommend looking over our [debugging guide](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/blob/master/intro-to-R-tidyverse/00b-debugging_resources.md) which can explain what some of the most common errors mean.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend looking over our [debugging guide](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/blob/{{site.release_tag}}/intro-to-R-tidyverse/00b-debugging_resources.md) which can explain what some of the most common errors mean.
```
Any links to the training modules need to use the release tag convention.

The debugging guide also has tips on first steps to take which may help you get to the root of the problem.

**A short list of things to try:**  

- Try to identify which part of your code appears to be the problem through trying smaller parts of the code and seeing if the error still occurs (called chunking).
In the chunking example below, each highlighted portion is something you could run by itself to test.

> (Using `Command + Enter` in RStudio will run what you have highlighted.)

Reviewer 3: I think `control-enter` on windows & linux? Pls check.

<img src = "screenshots/chunking_code.png" width = "500">

> - Go back to the beginning of your notebook and re-run your code in order and make sure you haven't missed any vital steps! Order matters!

Reviewer 3: Do we want to tell them about the down arrow with a line (picture will help here) next to the play button? This will run everything from the top down to the current chunk. Very handy. 

Also, clean out environment first? This should rarely be a problem, but it can be. If we are rerunning everything, might as well.

- Note that line numbers change as you've added code, so line numbers as a reference aren't as helpful.

*For our example:*  
<img src = "screenshots/where-is-the-error.png" width = "600">

### What is the goal of this code?  

- Describing your end goals for this code will provide context for others so they can tailor their advice with your goal in mind.
    *Examples of information you may want to include (whenever it is applicable):*
    - What is your scientific question?
    - What does your input data look like?
       - What kind of file *e.g.* `.TSV`, `.fastq`?
       - What information is included the data?
       - What are the columns?
       - What are the rows?
    - What'd your desired output?
       - What kind of results are you looking for e.g. a plot, a table, processed/filtered data?
       - What kind of file *e.g.* `.TSV`, `.fastq`?

- Sometimes you can bypass an error completely by using an alternative strategy altogether, but your helper won't be able to suggest an alternative if they don't know your ultimate goal.

*For our example:*  
<img src = "screenshots/what-is-the-goal.png" width = "600">

### What is the code that is producing this error?

> - You should [use backticks (```) to format your code.](../virtual-setup/slack-procedures.md#adding-code-blocks-to-messages) (How to do this in the next step).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Use backticks (```) to format your code.](../virtual-setup/slack-procedures.md#adding-code-blocks-to-messages) (How to do this in the next step).
```
I want to be even more prescriptive here.

Formatting your code makes it easier for others to distinguish between your code and the words in your post where you are otherwise describing the problem.

> - Screenshots are not ideal because others can't copy-paste your code from a screenshot. Being able to copy-paste the code with backticks makes it easiest for others to help you.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Screenshots are not ideal because others can't copy your code from a screenshot. 
Being able to copy and paste the code itself makes it much easier for others to help you, and to provide a reply with code that you can copy!
```

*For our example:*  
<img src = "screenshots/what-is-the-code.png" width = "600">

### What is the error or problematic outcome?  

> - Include any error messages verbatim. Also preferably not a screenshot so others can copy-paste for Google searching.

Reviewer 3: Am I being too snarky with this parenthetical? Maybe, but if we are going to give away our secrets, let's encourage people to apply them to their own work?

```suggestion
- Include any error messages verbatim. 
Also preferably not a screenshot so others can copy-paste for Google searching (Did you try that? It's often surprisingly helpful!).
```

Author: I'll probably change the wording to de-snark a tad, but I'll keep the sentiment. :+1:

     - *Example*: "This data.frame I'm showing in my code, called `cool_df` doesn't have row names when I look at it in my environment panel".
- Context around when the error appears versus when it does not can be helpful clues to your reader.

*For our example:*  
<img src = "screenshots/what-is-the-error.png" width = "600">

### (Optional) What have you tried thus far?  

- This is considered an optional point because we understand you also may not know where to begin (and that is definitely okay - we are here to help!)

- If you have tried some things to fix the problem; it can be helpful for others to know what you've tried and narrow down on what the problem might be.

- If you have tried solutions you have found posted online, including the links to those solutions is helpful.

*For our example:*  
<img src = "screenshots/what-have-you-tried.png" width = "600">

## Step 3) Post to Slack!

Navigate to your particular workshop's training channel.

If you wrote out our example question post in a text editor, it may have looked like this; where backticks will become code chunks after we copy-paste it in Slack:

<img src = "screenshots/text-editor.png" width = "500">

> When you are typing out your question you may find it helpful to have our "four points" as your headers but that is up to you.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what this means. Mostly because there are no "headers" in Slack?

Author: This was my brain thinking in "markdown". Will re-word.

We've also included [a checklist you could use for creating your post](#posting-a-code-question-checklist).

> When we copy and paste our text in Slack, it may ask  you if you'd like to `Apply formatting`. Click `Apply`:

Reviewer 3: we or you?
```suggestion
When you paste your text into Slack, it may ask if you'd like to `Apply formatting`. Click `Apply`:
```

<img src = "screenshots/slack-apply-formatting.png" width = "500">

> This will change your post to be formatted:

Reviewer 3: What if it doesn't? I ask because I have certainly had pasted code not get formatted, for unknown reasons. We should probably encourage them to look to see if the formatting is what they expect, and to add code formatting (& the difference between `code` and `code block`?) if Slack messes up (or they don't put all the formatting in their text). 

I don't think you have anywhere that you tell people to give variable names in their text `code format`, but that is also helpful... (not as important as the main code block though)

Author: Add the `Shift Command F` tip for applying formatting. I'm worried about also asking for variables to be in backticks. This document is already prescribing a lot.

<img src = "screenshots/slack-formatting-applied.png" width = "500">

If all looks set, click the green arrow to post it!

**Slack Tip:** if you see a mistake in your post you missed, you can click on the three dots in the corner of your Slack post and choose `Edit message` and fix the mistake:

<img src = "screenshots/slack-edit-message.png" width = "500">

## Step 4) Look for responses (in the same thread)!

We don't want anyone's questions or responses to get lost, especially after you've followed these careful steps to craft it!

> So to keep responses from getting lost, we strongly encourage you to make your main question one post and keep all further messages and correspondence about that question in the same Slack thread.

Reviewer 2: I think you should hit this point harder. From #11, emphasis added here:

> Threading - both when first asking the question and **when returning to the same notebook a few steps later with a new question** (helps with context if a different instructor answers the question and in a way that requires less explanation on the participant's part!)

The idea behind that write up is that they don't have to type out what notebook they're using again because it will be earlier in the thread. Also, I think sometimes earlier errors can be informative for instructors when debugging (see point about order mattering).
